Add a tutorial on writing a bag from your own node in Python (#2029)
ros2/ros2_documentation: source/Tutorials/Ros2bag/Recording-A-Bag-From-Your-Own-Node-Python.rst

.. _ROS2BagOwnNodePython:

Recording a bag from your own node
==================================

**Goal:** Record data from your own Python node to a bag.

**Tutorial level:** Advanced

**Time:** 20 minutes

.. contents:: Contents
   :depth: 2
   :local:

Background
----------

``rosbag2`` doesn't just provide the ``ros2 bag`` command line tool.
It also provides a Python API for reading from and writing to a bag from your own source code.

> This allows you to subscribe to a topic and save the received data to a bag at the same time as performing any other processing of your choice on that data.

Author: Done in b5fb0cc.

Prerequisites
-------------

You should have the ``rosbag2`` packages installed as part of your regular ROS 2 setup.

If you've installed from Debian packages on Linux, it may be installed by default.
If it is not, you can install it using this command.

.. code-block:: console

  sudo apt install ros-{DISTRO}-rosbag2

This tutorial discusses using ROS 2 bags, including from the terminal.
You should have already completed the :ref:`basic ROS 2 bag tutorial <ROS2Bag>`.

Tasks
-----

1 Create a package
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Open a new terminal and :ref:`source your ROS 2 installation <ConfigROS2>` so that ``ros2`` commands will work.

> Navigate into the ``dev_ws`` directory created in a :ref:`previous tutorial <new-directory>`.

Author: That reference should point to here:
```
https://docs.ros.org/en/galactic/Tutorials/Workspace/Creating-A-Workspace.html#new-directory
```

                name='chatter',
                type='std_msgs/msg/String',
                serialization_format='cdr')
            self.writer.create_topic(topic_info)

            self.subscription = self.create_subscription(
                String,
                'chatter',
                self.topic_callback,
                10)
            self.subscription

        def topic_callback(self, msg):
            self.writer.write(
                'chatter',
                serialize_message(msg),
                self.get_clock().now().nanoseconds)

    def main(args=None):
        rclpy.init(args=args)
        sbr = SimpleBagRecorder()
        rclpy.spin(sbr)
        rclpy.shutdown()

    if __name__ == '__main__':
        main()

2.1 Examine the code
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The ``import`` statements at the top are the package dependencies.
Note the importation of the ``rosbag2_py`` package for the functions and structures necessary to work with bag files.

In the class constructor we begin by creating the writer object we will use to write to the bag.
We are creating a ``SequentialWriter``, which writes messages into the bag in the order received.

> Other writers with different behaviours may be available.

Author: Done in 8eaedb6.

.. code-block:: Python

>             self.writer = rosbag2_py.SequentialWriter()

Author: Done in 3ec19df.

      source install/setup.bash

  .. group-tab:: macOS

    .. code-block:: console

      source install/setup.bash

  .. group-tab:: Windows

    .. code-block:: console

      call install/setup.bat

Now run the node:

.. code-block:: console

    ros2 run bag_recorder_nodes_py simple_bag_recorder

Open a second terminal and run the ``talker`` example node.

.. code-block:: console

    ros2 run demo_nodes_cpp talker

This will start publishing data on the ``chatter`` topic.
As the bag-writing node receives this data, it will write it to the ``my_bag`` bag.

Terminate both nodes.
Then, in one terminal start the ``listener`` example node.

.. code-block:: console

    ros2 run demo_nodes_cpp listener

In the other terminal, use ``ros2 bag`` to play the bag recorded by your node.

.. code-block:: console

    ros2 bag play my_bag

You will see the messages from the bag being received by the ``listener`` node.

If you wish to run the bag-writing node again, you will first need to delete the ``my_bag`` directory.

4 Record synthetic data from a node
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Any data can be recorded into a bag, not just data received over a topic.

> A common use case for writing to a bag from your own node is to generate and store synthetic data.

Author: Done in 08ba79c

Open the ``setup.py`` file in the ``bag_recorder_nodes_py`` package and add an entry point for your node.

.. code-block:: Python

    entry_points={
        'console_scripts': [
            'simple_bag_recorder = bag_recorder_nodes_py.simple_bag_recorder:main',
            'data_generator_node = bag_recorder_nodes_py.data_generator_node:main',
        ],
    },

4.4 Build and run
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Navigate back to the root of your workspace, ``dev_ws``, and build your package.

.. tabs::

  .. group-tab:: Linux

    .. code-block:: console

      colcon build --packages-select bag_recorder_nodes

  .. group-tab:: macOS

    .. code-block:: console

      colcon build --packages-select bag_recorder_nodes

  .. group-tab:: Windows

    .. code-block:: console

      colcon build --merge-install --packages-select bag_recorder_nodes

Open a new terminal, navigate to ``dev_ws``, and source the setup files.

.. tabs::

  .. group-tab:: Linux

    .. code-block:: console

      source install/setup.bash

  .. group-tab:: macOS

    .. code-block:: console

      source install/setup.bash

  .. group-tab:: Windows

    .. code-block:: console

      call install/setup.bat

> (If the ``timed_synthetic_bag`` directory already exists, you must first delete it before running the node.)

Author: Done in e96be66.

.. code-block:: Python

    entry_points={
        'console_scripts': [
            'simple_bag_recorder = bag_recorder_nodes_py.simple_bag_recorder:main',
            'data_generator_node = bag_recorder_nodes_py.data_generator_node:main',
            'data_generator_executable = bag_recorder_nodes_py.data_generator_executable:main',
        ],
    },

5.4 Build and run
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Navigate back to the root of your workspace, ``dev_ws``, and build your package.

.. tabs::

  .. group-tab:: Linux

    .. code-block:: console

      colcon build --packages-select bag_recorder_nodes

  .. group-tab:: macOS

    .. code-block:: console

      colcon build --packages-select bag_recorder_nodes

  .. group-tab:: Windows

    .. code-block:: console

      colcon build --merge-install --packages-select bag_recorder_nodes

Open a terminal, navigate to ``dev_ws``, and source the setup files.

.. tabs::

  .. group-tab:: Linux

    .. code-block:: console

      source install/setup.bash

  .. group-tab:: macOS

    .. code-block:: console

      source install/setup.bash

  .. group-tab:: Windows

    .. code-block:: console

      call install/setup.bat

> (If the ``big_synthetic_bag`` directory already exists, you must first delete it before running the executable.)

Author: Done in 20bc299.

This allows us to generate a lot of data covering a wide span of time in much less time than playback will take.

.. code-block:: Python

   time_stamp = Clock().now()
   for ii in range(0, 100):
       data = Int32()
       data.data = ii
       writer.write(
           'synthetic',
           serialize_message(data),
           time_stamp.nanoseconds)
       time_stamp += Duration(seconds=1)

5.3 Add executable
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Open the ``setup.py`` file in the ``bag_recorder_nodes_py`` package and add an entry point for your node.

.. code-block:: Python

   entry_points={
       'console_scripts': [
           'simple_bag_recorder = bag_recorder_nodes_py.simple_bag_recorder:main',
           'data_generator_node = bag_recorder_nodes_py.data_generator_node:main',
           'data_generator_executable = bag_recorder_nodes_py.data_generator_executable:main',
       ],
   },

5.4 Build and run
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Navigate back to the root of your workspace, ``dev_ws``, and build your package.

.. tabs::

  .. group-tab:: Linux

    .. code-block:: console

>       colcon build --packages-select bag_recorder_nodes

Reviewer: The same with in other places.

```suggestion
      colcon build --packages-select bag_recorder_nodes_py
```

``rosbag2`` doesn't just provide the ``ros2 bag`` command line tool.
It also provides a Python API for reading from and writing to a bag from your own source code.
This allows you to subscribe to a topic and save the received data to a bag at the same time as performing any other processing of your choice on that data.
You may do this, for example, to save data from a topic and the result of processing that data without needing to send the processed data over a topic just to record it.
Because any data can be recorded in a bag, it is also possible to save data generated by another source than a topic, such as synthetic data for training sets.

> This is useful, for example, for generating in a short time a bag that contains a large number of samples spread over a long playback time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is useful, for example, for quickly generating a bag that contains a large number of samples spread over a long playback time.
```

You created a node that records data it receives on a topic into a bag.
You tested recording a bag using the node, and verified the data was recorded by playing back the bag.

> This approach can be used to record to a bag additional data to that received over a topic, for example the results of processing received data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This approach can be used to record a bag with additional data than it received over a topic, for example with results obtained from processing the received data.
```
